Effective config spec [redux] (#395)
signalfx/gdi-specification: specification/opamp_datamodel.md

[non-identifying attributes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opamp-spec/blob/main/specification.md#agentdescriptionnon_identifying_attributes).
GDI language agents SHOULD follow the upstream guidance for which
OpenTelemetry `Resource` attributes belong in this field.

## Effective Configuration

### Agent configuration context

The
[OpAMP specification](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#effectiveconfig-message)
includes a mechanism for agents to report their effective configuration
to the server.
We interpret "effective configuration" to mean the current, active
configuration being used by the agent, regardless of how that

> configuration was obtained, injected, defaulted, or otherwise evaluated.

Reviewer: So, spec talk only about configuration, not about how it will be interpreted by component?
So, I read it - if configuration processor set sime default value on missing setting - it should be reported.
If component use some default for key not presented in config - it is behaviour and not configuration, it should not be reported.

It is very important difference.
We can report all configuration as extandable entity. Ig some plugin put new key in it - it will be reported (here we have a problem - currently at least in .NET there is no explicit semantic for security sensitive config. I don't know how we can filter-out sensitive setting which we don't know about - unless we extend config API later, which will be not soon.

Alternatively, we can report how some features/component work. That is closed set of reportable items. We can define which is minimum set, but each agent will decide what it want to report.

I beleive that, at least for .NET best format is key=value - it is internal config representation. Nothing in spec said that we should be able to automatically merge back effective config.

Additionally, we may want to report how config file looked (source and processed) - in that case it will be raw format used by files. It should not be interpreted on backed. It is just for refence.
We can include both, as separate file:
- effective (key value pair)
- src/<file_path> (yaml without substitutes env, key/value pair with existing env variables otherwise)
- processed/<file_path> (yaml with resolved env references, key/value pair with existing env variables otherwise)

That still will be compatible with what I read from OpAmp spec. And all of it is effective config.

Reviewer 2: I like the idea of sending what we have as well, but in a slightly different format:

- effective config (the YAML file containing the actual configuration currently used by the application)
- raw env vars (values used for configuration)
- raw YAML (YAML without substituted environment variables)

Author: Let's address some of @iskiselev's questions/concerns:

> So, spec talk only about configuration, not about how it will be interpreted by component?

I don't know...but regardless, based on the number of times folks have confused "the yaml file" with "what the agent is actually using" I wanted the spec here to absolutely flipping clear. These are two different things. When we say effective config here, we intend it to be what the agent is actively using. Not anything else.

> So, I read it - if configuration processor set sime default value on missing setting - it should be reported. 

Yes. This spec says that all config, even defaults, should be reported.

> If component use some default for key not presented in config - it is behaviour and not configuration, it should not be reported.

No. This spec says it should be reported. Report it. If you don't send it, then users may never know that the setting exists.

> It is very important difference. We can report all configuration as extandable entity. Ig some plugin put new key in it - it will be reported (here we have a problem - currently at least in .NET there is no explicit semantic for security sensitive config. I don't know how we can filter-out sensitive setting which we don't know about - unless we extend config API later, which will be not soon.

Yup. We don't have a definition for "sensitive", so I just threw my hands up and said that it's needed but not (yet?) defined here. I hate it too.

> Alternatively, we can report how some features/component work. That is closed set of reportable items. We can define which is minimum set, but each agent will decide what it want to report.

In the first PR, people argued against this. There was pushback that incrementally determining what users might one day care about would be too time consuming. 🤷🏻 

> I beleive that, at least for .NET best format is key=value - it is internal config representation. Nothing in spec said that we should be able to automatically merge back effective config.

The internal representation _should_ not be considered for this discussion. We're only trying to spec out how the internal representation gets surfaced on the wire. Every language has a different way of modeling their config while it's in memory.

> Additionally, we may want to report how config file looked (source and processed) - in that case it will be raw format used by files. It should not be interpreted on backed. It is just for refence. We can include both, as separate file:

We are not being asked to report the source of configuration. We're only being asked to report the effective configuration. I will treat that as an entirely different problem.

Reviewer: @breedx-splk, if we need to report component behaviour (how it will react on non-configured setting) - our configuration system should know about every component and how they work in different modes or how to check it. It is impossible with open infrastructure, not at least in current state of it - component new version may always add new config / change deafults or some plugin can be installed. It may be possible if some config reporting API will be developed and each component will be able to report settings back to it - but even in that case, it will be not all settings - but all reported settings.
Alternative aproach is reporting setting files without parsing them. File are designed to be extendable and new settings not known to config system may be added there (or, alternatively, special prefixed env variables).

It is possible to have some hybrid aproaches - when config files are augmented to *know set of defaults / runtime overrides*.

But we can't ask report all, potentially unknown state.

Author: > It is impossible with open infrastructure, not at least in current state of it 
<snip>
> But we can't ask report all, potentially unknown state.

I agree. I think it's completely ridiculous to ask this. I think the best we could do is to hard code a list of "well here is everything we know today" and then revisit that periodically, but that also doesn't sound sustainable.

Reviewer 3: >We are not being asked to report the source of configuration. We're only being asked to report the effective configuration. I will treat that as an entirely different problem.

Agree, let's keep it very simple and add features iteratively.

> We interpret "effective configuration" to mean the current, active
> configuration being used by the agent, regardless of how that
> configuration was obtained, injected, defaulted, or otherwise evaluated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We interpret "effective configuration" to mean the actual configuration currently 
used by the application at runtime, regardless of how that configuration was obtained.
```

> Because configuration can come in many forms, this creates several challenges.
> Configuration can be provided as environment variables,
> [declarative config](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/sdk-configuration/declarative-configuration/)
> files (yaml), java system properties, and eventually remote
> configuration. That's at least 4 ways of controlling agent behavior, but
> some agents will have even more.
> 
> We've decided to collapse these mechanisms into a single
> "effective configuration" wire format in OpAmp payloads. This decision
> was made in spite of the fact that some configuration will be difficult
> (or nearly impossible) to represent in this format.
> It is believed that having one universal grab bag format will be better
> than two domain-specific formats.

Reviewer 2: This information is unnecessary because it does not matter how or from where the configuration was obtained; what matters is the configuration that is actually being used by the application.

```suggestion

```

Author: It is intended to provide some additional context behind the rationale.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, context is nice!

configuration is or is not dynamically modifiable.

### Effective Configuration

Agents that have an OpAMP connection enabled MUST report their
effective configuration to the OpAMP server.

When reporting `EffectiveConfig`, the following MUST be followed:

* The `ConfigMap` MUST contain an `AgentConfigFile` under the name that
  exactly matches the filename provided in the `OTEL_CONFIG_FILE`
  environment variable. This MUST include any relative or absolute path
  information originally included in the value. If an agent is using a
  defaulted (not user-provided) config filename, this default filename
  value MUST still be provided.
* This `AgentConfigFile` MUST have a `content_type` of
  `application/yaml; vendor=splunk; v=1.0.0`. This content type tells the
  remote side how to interpret the content within the `AgentConfigFile`
  `body`. The v field
  allows us to revise this format in a backwards compatible way in the future.
* The `AgentConfigFile` body MUST conform to the body format below, and
  agents MUST NOT send effective configuration in any other format because
  it weakens our insistence on uniformity and because we are worried that

>   it could cause backend services to do more work.

Reviewer 3: If I understand it correctly, we'd key the effective configuration by the file path?

I would normalize the keys and use a standard one for the effective configuration, e.g. `config.effective` -> `AgentConfigFile` and keep the config file path out of this PR.

Then (out of the scope of this PR) if we later actually need to send the env vars or the YAML file (as a debugging aid) we can just add additional keys:
```
config.raw.yaml.path -> myconfig.yaml
config.raw.yaml.content -> ditto
config.raw.env -> ditto
config.effective.origins -> mapping of keys to where the configuration value came from in config.effective (default / env / yaml / programmatic)
```

#### Body Format

The body of the effective config "file" SHOULD closely conform to the
yaml schema provided in the
[upstream OpenTelemetry schema repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-configuration/tree/main/schema).

This yaml MUST provide a blend of splunk-specific configuration and all
of the existing upstream configurations that exist. This includes all
effective config values for:

* every possible sdk configuration item
* every configuration item for every possible instrumentation
* every single default value for every possible configuration item that has
  not been specified by other configuration (environment, declarative,
  programmatic, etc.)

> * every possible feature flag and experimental feature

Reviewer 2: I think that might happen in the future, but for now we should focus only on the most essential ones.

Author: I agree.....focusing on the essential ones would be the better approach.

The challenge is that I tried that in the other PR. Some people are concerned that if we don't send the entire set that there will be UI use cases that cannot be explored. I still think we should start with a minimal set and expand as needed, but there's been push back.

Because resource attributes are already part of OpAMP agent
identity, the effective config body yaml MUST NOT contain
resource attributes.

Agents MUST provide effective configuration for every possible
configuration item, including features that have been disabled or
for configurations that include empty maps, dictionaries, or lists,
unless the mere existence of a configuration in the yaml changes the
semantics of what is currently "effectively" used.

When the existence of a configuration item in the yaml changes the
semantics of what's "effective", implementations SHOULD still include

> these configs as commented out yaml line(s) (beginning with a `#`).

Reviewer 3: Do we have an example where / how this could happen?

The OTel declarative configuration specification allows environment
variables to be used inside strings via templates. When templates are used,
the final template evaluated value MUST be provided, and not the environment
variable's name.

> #### Filtering Sensitive Data
> 
> The body of the effective configuration MUST NOT include secrets or other
> sensitive data. If a configuration being used by an agent does truly include
> sensitive values, then the agent MUST overwrite these values with the asterisk
> character (`*`) before the effective config is sent over OpAMP.
> 
> The vague and nebulous description of what constitutes "sensitive data"
> or a "secret" is outside the scope of this specification.

Reviewer 2: At the beginning, if we leave only the `Required fields`, then Sensitive Data is not included in them.
```suggestion

```

Reviewer 3: I'd keep the masking part, make it configurable (default: on) in the OpAMP configuration.
Afaik only `X-SF-TOKEN` would make sense to filter from our side.

Out of scope of this PR: Agents could add an option to let users add a programmatic filter/mask for the keys, but only as a suggestion (SHOULD).
